Do you have data you want to visualize and share? It's easy enough to make a static graph of it,
but what if you want to zoom in and highlight different sections? What if you need to rerun
your machine learning model on the selected data? Then you might want to consider working with Bokeh.
It does this and much more. Join me on this episode where you'll meet Brian Vandeven,
who heads up the Bokeh project. This is Talk Python to Me, episode 222, recorded July 24th, 2019.
Welcome to Talk Python to Me, a weekly podcast on Python, the language, the libraries,
the ecosystem, and the personalities. This is your host, Michael Kennedy. Follow me on Twitter,
where I'm @mkennedy. Keep up with the show and listen to past episodes at talkpython.fm,
and follow the show on Twitter via at Talk Python.
This episode is brought to you by Ting and Linode. Please check out what they're offering
during their segments. It really helps support the show. Brian, welcome to Talk Python.
Hi, thanks for having me.
Yeah, it's great to have you here. You know, I've often thought about ways in which I could
use some of these cool Python visualization libraries, and I haven't recently had some
great excuses to use them, so I haven't really covered them enough on the show, but I'm really
excited to talk about Bokeh with you this week.
Oh, I'm super excited to be here. I think Bokeh has really developed a lot over the last year or so
in particular, and so this is a great opportunity.
Yeah, absolutely. Before we get to it, though, let's start with your story. How'd you get into
programming in Python?
In Python? So I think the first version of Python I ever used was Python 1.4, actually way,
way back in the day, and I was doing some system administration kind of job, so there was a lot
of Perl, but I happened to get into using Python for a few things, and it was a lot of fun. Put it
down for a while, picked it up here and there, but I've been using it pretty extensively
probably since about 2005 or 2006.
Okay, yeah, those are pretty early days, Python 1, right? We don't have that debate about 1 versus
2 anymore. It's moved on to 2 versus 3.
Yeah, I don't think there was ever really much debate. Everyone was ready for Python 2 for sure.
Yeah, absolutely. So how'd you get into programming in the first place?
Let's see. The first thing I ever did was on a TRS-80 that was actually checked out from our
local library. They had a program to check out TRS-80s for two weeks, and there was a logo cartridge
that came with it, so we could do logo programming. A little bit later, we had some Commodore computers,
and so I did, you know, basic, and I think at one point I even got into like 6502 assembly,
you know, when I was getting to be a teenager or something, but yeah, you know, just 8-bit
programming way back in the day.
Yeah, how interesting. Yeah, that's funny with assembly language, like that's not a super
easy compare it. Like you've got basic on one side and assembly language on the other. Not
a whole lot in between, huh?
Well, there's not a lot of different ways to program on a Commodore 64.
You had to earn your programming stripes back in the early days, that's for sure.
Nice. Okay, so Boca is a very visual thing. For a long time, you were at Anaconda Inc.
So, is there a science background as well that got you sort of in that path, or how do you get
interested in all of these things? Yeah, I've had a pretty tortured academic path. I went to school
for computer science, then left for a while, and I worked in some research labs, and I realized,
hey, I want to go back to school, and so I actually ended up in graduate school for physics eventually,
and so I have a pretty strong, you know, mathematics, physics background, but ultimately,
I did decide to sort of go back into computer science, software engineering. I really like working
on software, though, that's in the service of analytical endeavors or science and that sort of thing,
and so this is why, you know, being able to work at Anaconda on all these tools has been really
fantastic. Yeah, it's got to be super rewarding to have so much impact on the science side. Are you
still at Anaconda? What are you doing these days? Like, what's a, what kind of programming and work
do you do day to day now? Yeah, no, I actually just recently left earlier in the year, so I was at
Anaconda from the beginning. I think I was the last original employee to leave, in fact, except for
Peter Wang, of course, who's still there, but, you know, eight years is a long time, and so it's just time for
me to go look for something different, and I actually went to go work at Microsoft, and that was really on the
strength of some interactions I'd had with folks at DevDiv and Microsoft around Python, around open
source. Everyone there has been really terrific and really supportive of Python and open source, and so I
think it's a very different company than when I, you know, thought about it 15 years ago, where I
probably would have used M dollar sign very sincerely on an angry forum post or something, but, you know,
everyone there has been really terrific. It's been a good experience, and day-to-day, I work on Azure SDK
for Python these days, which is, you know, a lot of PR reviewing, writing some code, and
helping move the direction there.
Oh, that's really interesting. You probably feel like you're bringing a little bit of the outside
to Microsoft, right? Like, it is a very different company. They're more open to external stuff, but,
you know, historically, it hasn't always been that way, so it's probably like, let me tell you about the
Python scientific stack, folks, things like that, yeah?
It's definitely interesting, and there's a lot of give and take. So I've actually learned,
I haven't been in an organization this large in a very long time, and so it's been a lot of personal growth
and learning for me, just to be in that kind of environment where, you know, people have to interact
in different ways, and that's been very gratifying and helpful for me, but definitely, I think I have a
pretty useful perspective to bring as well, especially in terms of, yeah, data science applications
in Python and that sort of thing.
Yeah, yeah, super cool. It sounds like a fun job. So let's start off this conversation talking about
Bokeh by kind of getting the, like, a big picture of, you know, making pictures with Python, right?
So if I have a graph, I want to do a map, if I want to do some kind of bar chart or some
visualization of data, what are my options nowadays?
There are a lot. So if people want to Google, there's actually a chart made by Jake Vanderplass,
who, you know, is very active in sort of the PyData, SciPy community. He tried to draw a map,
basically, of all the Python visualization landscape, and there are a lot of tools available. And some
people think this is really great, and there's a lot of choice, and then some people think that
there's just, you know, too many things, and they don't know what to deal with. But there are a lot
of tools. So obviously, you know, MapPlotlib is the very big tool that's been around for a very long
time. It's a really fantastic tool, and all the devs there, you know, they work really hard. And
it's been great to see the sort of the strides that it's made in the last few years. In terms of,
like, web visualization, there's, you know, Bokeh, of course. Plotly is another offering that's out
there by the company Plotly. Altair is another tool that's been fairly recently added. Actually,
Jake Vanderplass and Brian Granger from Jupyter put that together. And so it's inspired by
the Vega plotting sort of toolkit that's available in browsers. And it's sort of a Python wrapper for
that.
Yeah, that's cool. I've heard a lot of good stuff about Altair, and that it's really quite nice as
well.
Yeah, I don't have a lot of experience with it. I mean, it's definitely intended for
very high level sort of exploratory data analysis. It's very, you know, useful, especially in notebooks
in particular. And so it looks very attractive from the things that I've seen. I just am so,
you know, I'm very involved in Bokeh. And it takes up so much of my time that I almost don't
have time to look at too many other things very often. But, you know, Jake's a fantastic guy.
Brian Granger, of course, is great and has made just amazing things for the PyData and SciPy
communities. So that's a great tool that they put together.
Cool. And, you know, there's always things like the JavaScript libraries, like D3 and stuff like
that. Is that really relevant? Or are we kind of got a handle with things like Bokeh and Plotly and so on?
You know, so people ask that a lot. Like, what's the difference between Python and D3? Or why would you use
one versus the other? And I think if you have people that are, you know, already using JavaScript
and they want to work on things with D3, D3 is an amazing tool and it can make incredible, you know,
output and really fantastic graphics. And there's probably things that are doable in D3 that maybe
would be more difficult in, you know, Bokeh, for instance. But where I think the sweet spot for Bokeh
is we've really tried to make it so that people who are already very productive in Python, they're doing,
you know, work in data science or science, who are using all these tools that are in the PyData stack,
you know, NumPy and SciPy and Pandas and scikit-learn and, you know, Dask and Numba and all
these tools that are really productive with these in Python. We won't let them have access to very
interactive, powerful visualizations in the browser without having to reach for that JavaScript
and web tech and sort of be distracted from the actual work that they want to do. And so
in terms of productivity, I think if you're already working in Python, I think Bokeh is a great
choice, to put it that way.
Yeah. Well, Bokeh to me feels like I get a lot of the benefits of the rich JavaScript stuff,
but that I don't actually have to make it.
That's a very, yeah.
Yeah. A very succinct way to put it. Yeah.
Okay. Interesting. And then maybe we could talk really quickly about Plotly just as a compare and
contrast. So Plotly, like I don't fully understand Plotly. When I go to work with it, I feel like,
okay, I'm working with a library, but then it seems like it has like a backend that they provide that
I have to deal with. And then there's also a commercial version. Like what is Plotly? I don't really
know where it fits. So in terms of their business, I actually don't know a lot. To be honest, I don't,
I don't really follow that very closely. And so I think they've actually changed some of their
offerings from, from what they used to be. I think they used to, you know, sell Plotly and I think
they're not in that business anymore, but I can't really speak to that very carefully. But the main
similarities are it's a Python API that generates a declarative, you know, specification,
typically some kind of JSON that can be rendered by a front end library. Now, you know, Plotly is an
entire company centered around this. And so they have had some really nice resources for, I think,
developing both, you know, some things in ways that Bokeh hasn't had. Like I think, you know,
their front end is a little more polished and some of the, you know, design stuff is definitely
polished. And I'd love to get some help on the Bokeh side to sort of bring that up to speed.
But, you know, relatively speaking, I think we've done a pretty good job at, you know,
having the same set of features. They're very contemporaneous. They started at almost the same time,
you know, way back in sort of 2012 kind of era. They have a lot of similarities,
but definitely there's a little bit of difference. You know, my background comes from a lot of science
stuff. So I'm really familiar with folks that have use cases, for instance, around like dense
arrays, like, you know, big images. And so we've really focused on some things like having an
efficient array protocol for the Bokeh server that can transmit large arrays, you know, very efficiently.
And whereas I don't think they've sort of gone down that route, you know, again,
they've worked on some other features that are more around slick dashboarding and, you know,
that sort of thing.
Okay. Yeah. Interesting. You know, let's talk about the history of Bokeh. Like you're saying it that way,
and I guess I'm as well, I'm trying to anyway, the way the proper pronunciation is.
I usually say Bokeh, but Bokeh, I think is also fine. Amusingly, long ago when we were funded through
this DARPA X-Data initiative, there was some video that someone made, you know, unrelated to all the
actual projects, but they made about the projects. And I remember in that they were describing all the
projects that was under the X-Data initiative. And they mentioned the visual database Boke,
I think. That's the only wrong pronunciation.
Bokeh is not Bokeh. All right.
Okay. It's fine. Yeah.
All right. Excellent. And so where did it get started? It started out of research grants and
this DARPA funding. Is that where it came from?
No, the research grants really helped, but it started before then. So going back a little bit
further. So I've been interested in visualization for a long time. Actually, the first, one of the
first things I use in Python and Python 1.4 was a plotting plugin for Apache. And it was just,
it amazed me that you could like take data and have a website just make a plot. It was incredible.
I worked a little bit on VTK here and there years ago. A few, my first open source contributions
were to VTK. But in the middle aughts, I guess, I went to work for a company with Peter Wang,
who eventually founded Anaconda. And I worked with him on a library called Chaco, which was a rich client
library for interactive visualization. So instead of in the browser, you would write like a Python
application that was using like, you know, QT or, you know, the GTK, you know, kind of real
application. And it was also contemporaneous with Plotlib.
But ultimately, Matt Plotlib won sort of that battle. And the reason was pretty clear. It was
because, you know, while Chaco had all this really rich capability for an activity, it was a very sort
of fiddly API, very detailed, kind of verbose. And so later on, when Peter was getting Anaconda
started, and I was on board to help with that, we had talked about wanting to update this idea of
Chaco and create a new library that supported interactive visualizations and in browsers,
because right, browsers is the right place for it to be in 2012, right?
Of course.
And so we had this idea, we started it. But getting the, you know, the funding through the
DARPA X8 initiative in the early years of Anaconda, is then called Continuum Analytics,
really helped, you know, mitigate business risk for us to put more resources into it. So it really
accelerated the development, I would say. But we have certainly, you know, we started talking about
the ideas behind Bokeh in sort of middle 2011, probably.
Okay. Yeah, that's, that's pretty interesting. It's been around for a while. I guess that's,
at that point, Ajax and interactive browser stuff's pretty well established, right? So it's pretty
clear that was the right place.
Yeah, I mean, we just knew that, like, the future of presentation and the future of getting, you know,
this content in front of people was going to be in browsers. So writing another rich client library
was not something that was really interesting to us. And so we definitely wanted to do the browser.
And then we definitely wanted to make it architected in a way that it was very flexible,
that it had this declarative specification that described what you wanted to visualize.
Because, you know, that affords a lot of possibilities. So we've talked about the Python
side of Bokeh, but you can actually have other languages drive Bokeh plots in the browser,
you know, there's an R Bokeh binding, there is a Scala Bokeh binding that hasn't been updated in a while.
I'm interested in actually reviving a Julia Bokeh binding. But that's all because there's this
JSON specification. And any language that can, you know, dump out the right JSON can create these
Bokeh plots in the browser. Now, we've spent a lot of effort investing in the Python bindings,
because, you know, Anaconda is a big Python shop. But certainly the possibility is there for other
languages as well.
Okay, so maybe it's worth just touching on the architecture a little bit, and we can dive
into the details more later. So there's a, I guess there's a couple ways we can use this,
right? Like, there's a, probably the most straightforward way is we have a Bokeh server.
And then there's some front end stuff that is the rendering point, right? Like I want to put a,
some kind of graph in a browser, and the server handles all the data, and maybe it only prevents,
presents like a slice into that world of the data and things like that, right? Can you tell us about
that?
That's absolutely a great use case for the server. But I will say the server is,
in fact, optional. I would say most usage of Bokeh probably doesn't involve the server. So Bokeh can
generate this JSON, and it can send it to a web page that can be embedded in like a Flask app or a Django
app. It can be embedded in, you know, Jupyter notebook output cells. And it doesn't have to be
connected to the Bokeh server. Bokeh.js will take that JSON and render it. And you've got an interactive
plot that has panning and zooming. You can even have linked behaviors between plots. You can have custom JS
callbacks that, you know, do work whenever you make a selection or click a button. None of that
requires the Bokeh server. What the Bokeh server is really great for is when you want to connect all
those interactive features to real running Python code. Like you want to click a button and have a,
you know, a scikit-learn regression or a scikit-learn model run, or you want to, you know,
make a selection on a plot and compute a linear regression line through those selected points
with real Python code. That's what the Bokeh server is really great for, making that sort of two-way
connection between this front end and real running Python code. But you can use Bokeh very effectively
without the Bokeh server. And in fact, I guess, I think most usage is probably, we call it standalone
usage, where it's just generating this pile of JSON that is used to drive a Bokeh plot in a webpage
somewhere. This portion of Talk Python to Me is brought to you by Ting. Let me tell you about Ting,
a new mobile service available in the US that's targeted developers and other technically savvy folks.
First of all, their average customer only pays $23 a month, but they're no discount provider.
Their service runs over T-Mobile's and Sprint's fast nationwide network.
If you don't use that much data because you're usually on Wi-Fi, like many of you are,
then Ting will save you a ton of cash. But don't worry, you can still use as much data as you like
for just $10 per gig. One mobile feature I use all the time is tethering. And with Ting,
you get unlimited tethering at the same data rate with your account. $6 a month for a phone line,
$10 a gig, $3 a month for text if you usually chat over iMessage or WhatsApp. Think about it,
no contracts and super clear and fair billing. Visit python.ting.com. That's python.ting.com and check
out their savings calculator. Enter your usage and see exactly what you'd pay. Use that link and you'll
get a $25 credit to try them as well. That's python.ting.com or just click the link in the show notes.
The server is mostly about the interactive bits if you want to add smarts to your plots.
Yeah, absolutely. If you want to connect all those PyData tools, NumPy, SciPy, Pandas, Dask,
Numba, OpenCV, any of those tools. If you want to connect those things directly to
these interactive visualizations with a minimal amount of fuss, that is what the Bokeh server is for.
Exactly.
Okay, cool. Before we move off the history and Anaconda Inc. and all that, when you created it,
it sounds like you tried to create it as a standalone project with its own fundraising and its own
outreach. What was the thinking there rather than just making it part of Anaconda?
Well, I mean, in the very early days, it was definitely a project that was started at Anaconda.
And the DARPA thing came along somewhat serendipitously. Not something we counted on or
knew about when the company started. And that was a big sort of funding for a long time. After that ran
out, because that was a fixed number of years sort of support, Anaconda very generously supported the
development of Bokeh. But ultimately, it was always the goal to try to create these tools as sort of
self-sufficient, self-governing, push them out in the open kind of projects. And so it took a long time
to get to that point. The first step in that was for Bokeh to become a NumFocus fiscally sponsored
project. But of late, we've really ramped up the self-governance and the self-sufficiency. So pretty
much at this point, I think the cord's been cut and Bokeh is really out there. It's managing its own CDN
resources. We're doing a lot of outreach and fundraising on
our own right now that wasn't happening even six months ago. We just had or still having actually
a July fundraiser going on to try to help pay for some of our infrastructure costs. But we're also
ramping up some corporate engagements and trying to talk to corporations and see if they want to offer
support. But that all is pretty new. For a long time, Anaconda was the primary beneficiary or
benefactor, I should say, of Bokeh.
Sure. And it just makes Python and data science stronger, which is really the heart of Anaconda Inc.
anyway. So it seems pretty reasonable. You said that the project was a NumFocus
project. And we spoke a little bit earlier about NumFocus a bit. And I guess my understanding is a
little bit off. I saw NumFocus as a thing that kind of provides funding to these projects. And
that's not quite exactly right, is it? What is NumFocus and what did it do for you all?
Yeah, it's sort of yes and no. So NumFocus was started by Travis Alphont, who was one of the other
co-founders of Anaconda. Of course, he's the original or he's the author of NumPy, building on previous work.
But NumFocus is this nonprofit, 501c3. And its main role is to be an umbrella organization for
open source projects, right? So open source projects often are not legal entities. And so that actually
makes it quite difficult for them to accept money, right? It sort of gets very complicated with taxes.
And so they're this legal entity that can accept donations on behalf of projects and then handle all
the tax stuff. They also do a lot of outreach. They hold, you know, they support the PyData meetups and
PyData conferences around the world. So they're this organization that sort of helps and supports
open source. And they do fund these projects in the sense that, you know, they help the donations that
come in get back to the projects. And also sometimes they spread some of those funds around. They get
bigger donations that they can also use to give to projects that, you know, don't necessarily raise
their own money. But yeah, that's their main role. Just to be this umbrella organization, they help out
with the bureaucracy and take away that load from these open source projects.
Yeah, that's really interesting. I guess it took me a long time to realize that it's
actually hard for companies to give money.
It's really hard.
To these projects, right? Like it's not just a matter of put aside the point whether they should
put aside the point whether they fiscally could. Of course, they most of them can and they should,
right? But just the way that they're set up is they buy things. They exchange money for a service or a
good. Even given to a charity like NumFocus probably is a little bit odd and hard for them to do.
That is exactly right. There is just an impedance mismatch. I mean, the sums of money that would help
a lot of open source projects, I think, are relatively small compared to the budgets of the
companies we're talking about that are using these projects. But yeah, there's just an impedance
mismatch for how do you actually it's not a purchase, right? And so it's not hiring someone. So what
exactly is it? And companies just, you know, right now don't know how to handle that and don't know how to
deal with it. And so there's some other efforts to make that easier. People are trying different
things. There's, you know, Travis's company, Quonsight, is trying out some models for, you know,
getting support for open source projects by engaging with companies in various ways. Tidelift as well
is also trying that. GitHub is, you know, trying their new sponsorship sorts of things. So people are
trying to find novel ways to attack this problem. And I hope we get there, but it's definitely
something that will take some time.
Yeah, I hope so as well, because it would make a huge difference and it would be
a blip for these companies to make that contribution, right?
Yeah. I mean, as an example, our goal for the July fundraiser was to raise a thousand dollars,
right? And we have, you know...
That's very modest, right?
I think several hundred thousand users and we did, you know, I'm really happy to report that we did,
but, you know, I had to tweet out a lot every day to make it happen. It was, you know, sort of
knocking on doors and, but yeah, I'd love to be able to go to companies and try to be more effective
and efficient at fundraising, if that makes sense.
Sure. Well, while we're on the subject, let's talk about your fundraiser real quick.
If you're going to raise a thousand dollars, that's probably not money to pay developers,
right? It's something else.
Yeah. I mean, I actually raised this exact issue around the sustainability conference that NumFocus
is going to have later in the year. I think there's sort of two different buckets where things go into
there's, you know, paying people. And I hope someday we can figure that out really well. And we can
support, you know, people to be maintainers of open source software by actually paying them to do
that work directly as a sort of a job or a living. But there's also just the matter of a lot of open
source projects, I think, could use a fairly small amount of money just to cover expenses or help
take some strain and stress off the maintainers. Like in the case of Bokeh, we have to run this,
you know, CDN to deploy Bokeh.js. So all the users around the world can get Bokeh.js to display their
plots. That is run on, you know, AWS CloudFront. And so we have to pay for that. Someone has to pay for
that. Right. And so that's what this fundraiser was for. And so in the sense that it, you know,
sort of reduces my stress because it helps me know that this is sort of taken care of for the next year.
That's what that level of sort of funding is for. And there's other stuff too. There's,
you know, it's good to get developers face to face sometimes. And so this could help with that
as well as other infrastructure costs.
Right. Some having some like yearly meet up with the core developers. It's odd. There's a lot of
projects where the core developers have never actually met.
Definitely. For sure. I think I've met everyone at least once, but there's some folks that are pretty
scattered for Bokeh. But for sure, I have no doubt that's the case.
Yeah, for sure. So you said that Bokeh works with this JSON output and it can just basically render
anything that can generate the JSON. It can go out and render that. You know, I think when I think of
graphs, I mostly think of notebooks and Jupyter and things like that. But also we can just plug this
into whatever. Is that right? I can plug it into just a Flask site. Can I plug it into even like a,
some kind of command line app and like somehow pop it up?
Yeah, I don't see why not. I mean, anything that can run JavaScript basically, right? Anything that can
load Bokeh.js. So if that's like an Electron app, I think that would be feasible, certainly in the,
you know, in the Jupyter notebook. But, you know, there's a variety of ways. We have a whole Bokeh.embed,
you know, API. And so there's a variety of different ways to embed Bokeh content. But if you're running a
Flask site, you can use one of those ways to pop up Bokeh content in the middle of your site and in
your template and sort of wherever you want to put it.
When I think about the data science space, there's some libraries and data structures that are just used
over and over and over. You mentioned Travis before. So there's NumPy. There's,
of course, Pandas. There's a bunch of other stuff built on top of that. Is there special
integration for those types of libraries? Like if I already have some NumPy array or I've got some
Panda data frame, is there a way to just like plug it into Bokeh?
Yeah. So Bokeh works really well with all those things. NumPy is an actual requirement,
runtime requirement for Bokeh. We tried to avoid that. Even in the beginning, we wanted to make Bokeh as
minimal and as accessible as possible. But NumPy is a requirement now. Pandas is not a hard
requirement, but Bokeh works really well with Pandas. If you have Pandas data frames,
you can basically plug them in anywhere a Bokeh column data source would go. I can automatically
sort of convert them or use them in a way that's useful, either data frames or group by objects.
And so we've tried to make it very easy to integrate with Pandas, but also make Pandas
not required. And so that's sort of the state where things are at. Anything that can sort of behave
like a list or an array or a Pandas series works pretty much out of the box with Bokeh.
Okay. Are there other major libraries that I don't know to ask about?
I think Bokeh works really well with Dask, I assume, because Dask has a data frame-like API.
Matt Rockland actually used Bokeh to develop the interactive dashboard that's sort of the cluster
monitor for Dask.
I think it's great as well. And I did have Matthew Rockland on before to talk about Dask,
but I don't know if everyone's listened to that one. And also if they've seen the actual
visualization of that. So could you maybe describe that real quickly, what Dask is and then that
dashboard? Because when I saw that, that just like blew me away.
Yeah. Dask is a tool for basically parallel distributed programming. And it's trying to
do so in a way that is a very sort of Pythonic, very Pandas-like API, right? So there's other
tools that do this sort of thing, but they come from other languages originally. And so their APIs are
maybe not very Pythonic and they kind of don't fit in well with Python tools. But Dask is meant to be
a very Pythonic tool for this distributed computing task. And so to that end, it has this dashboard
that Matt Rockland developed using Bokeh that can visualize everything that's going on around a
cluster that's doing computation all at once, right? So it can show you what
nodes are computing or waiting or they're transferring data in real time. And so that's
really helpful for diagnosing problems with parallel distributed computations. And so Matt has always
been very clear that Bokeh was great for him because he didn't have to write all this JavaScript to have
this really interactive dashboard. He could just write it in Python and connect it directly to his
telemetry that he was getting back from clusters and visualize it very quickly. And so I think it's
been a great tool for his users. I shouldn't say his users. It's a big project now. Dask has actually
grown up quite a bit. So I should say the Dask project's users. But we're happy to see that kind of thing happen.
You know, love to see Bokeh used in those kind of use cases.
Yeah. And it just looks so good and professional and, you know, live updating. It's really a nice
use case for Bokeh. And I think it's also a good testament to what you guys have built.
Well, it's also good to get feedback from real use cases like that. Nothing sharpens your tools
better than sort of having them honed against real problems, right? And so we love when people do
awesome things with Bokeh and tell us, you know, hey, this was great, but also this could be a little
bit better or easier. You know, this is how you could make my life, you know, simpler or here's some pain
points I had. That kind of feedback is really helpful from users.
Yeah. It's great to design something, but once it actually meets real users and real use cases,
like that's where it gets real. So you talked about Dask. Let's just touch on some of the other
things that is built upon Bokeh because Bokeh has been around since 2011, 2012, like you said,
and it's pretty stable for the most part.
It's a lot more stable recently. Yeah.
Yeah, that's great. So things are starting to build on top of it like Dask and just using it.
So what else is out there like that?
Well, there's a couple of different things in different classes of things, right? So first of
all, there's other libraries now that are starting to build on top of Bokeh. So there is Chartify,
which was created by the data labs at Spotify. And so it's their sort of high, very high level
sort of data science, opinionated data science API on top of Bokeh. There's a project called Pandas
Bokeh that just came out recently. That's sort of very tight integration with Pandas and using Bokeh to
generate interactive plots. There's also a set of tools created by some folks who are still at Anaconda
called sort of the efforts called PyViz. And so there's a tool called HoloViews, which is a very
data centric API, and it can generate interactive visualizations using Bokeh and other tools as well.
But there's also, you know, some tools like Data Shader, which are for, you know, very large data,
you can finally control how they're rendered. And so you can combine Data Shader with Bokeh, you know,
using HoloViews. So it can drive things at a very high level. So I'd love to see this effort where
people are building these things on top of Bokeh. And I'm also glad that now, you know, Bokeh was
a moving target for quite a while. And I very much appreciate the patience of all of our users who
sort of, you know, kept with us as we were figuring things out. But I would like, you know, we're trying
to be much more stable now. I think we've done a very good job since 1.0 was released at being,
you know, much more stable. That's very good. The other kind of things that get built on top of
Bokeh are more like applications or, you know, other projects. So there's a project called Microscopium
that is for, you know, sort of biosciences research. There's a tool called Light Curve that a bunch of
astronomers put together, which uses Bokeh to let you drill down. So you can see like an image of,
you know, some star or something and hover over a single pixel and really drill down into something
about, you know, that image using, you know, all the tools that are in Bokeh. You know, there's
actually quite a, Dask, of course, is a great example. And then there's actually a bunch of other
ones on GitHub. And I'm sorry, I don't have a list at the top of my head, but there are a lot of
exo-bioscience projects that are built on top of Bokeh. And, you know, financial trading is another
thing that comes up. People have done drug discovery type work on Bokeh. It's interesting where things are
popping up, especially, you know, now, and now things are more stable. I think it's really a great time for
that to happen.
Yeah, that's super cool. The Light Curve project looks amazing. I mean, to explore like data from the
the Kepler and TESS telescopes, that's pretty cool for exoplanet discovery. I mean, that's,
it's really exciting.
Like the project that you worked on is helping scientists like actually look for exoplanets.
Like, that's incredible.
That is a, no, it's really gratifying. Like, that's exactly the sort of thing that, you know,
I'd say we wanted to be able to enable and, and, and help, help make happen. So it's really
gratifying when people are able to use Bokeh for those kinds of situations.
Yeah, absolutely. Do you see Bokeh being useful or appropriate for like real-time dashboard type
of scenarios? I mean, obviously it draws great graphs. And then, you know, we talked about Dask
and the real view of that. So like, let's imagine I'm like building software for software, for
stock trading company or something like this. And I want to show in real time what the market's doing.
All the data the traders need. Would that be appropriate? Is it too low late or too high
latency or what's the story? I think it could be there's real time. And then there's quote,
unquote, real time. Right. So it's always depends on what exactly people mean when they say real time.
When I hear the word real time, I have images of like, you know, very low level, a certain kind
of system that's implemented that has very specific guarantees about its performance. And for that kind
of work, Bokeh is probably not suitable. Right. But if you're talking about real time, just in terms
of like streaming data coming in from a financial system or, you know, from, IOT type devices
or, you know, that sort of thing. And I think Bokeh can, has been useful. There's certainly
people who have come looking for support on our discourse or on our other support forums,
talking about using Bokeh, connecting it to real time sensors, for instance. Right. So they're in a
factory or a warehouse and they've got data coming in. I want to visualize something. So people do do
that. So if you mean, you know, quote unquote, real time, and just in the sense that I've got data
coming in and I want to visualize it in a best ever kind of way, then I think Bokeh is definitely a
good choice.
Yeah. And that's mostly what I meant. I mean, obviously not like we need seven millisecond response time or else
the plane crashes, something like that. Nothing like that. Right. But like, like when you're
thinking of graphs, right, like a human has to see the graph and interpret the graph. Right. So that's,
you know, how long is that? It can't be quicker than a hundred milliseconds. Right. Like the human
can't understand graphs that quick.
Well, and so real time is not even necessarily about quickness. It's really about predictability. It's
about specific kinds of guarantees. But, but yeah, so I should mention, yeah, Bokeh does have some APIs
for streaming specifically. Right. So, you know, if you've got data coming in or you want to update,
you know, just the newest point, you've got a, you know, a time series with a hundred thousand points,
you know, plotted and you've got new points coming in at the end. Bokeh can very efficiently just send
the new data, right. Without sending, you know, the entire data set. So it is very useful for that sort
of thing. Yeah. So then you load up the historical data and then you just take, you know, the update
every half a second or something. That sounds pretty doable. Yeah, absolutely. Okay. Even more often.
Yeah, yeah, yeah. Sure. That sounds, that sounds super interesting. One of the capabilities kind of
around that, that you talked about is being able to work with like quite large data, maybe having some
on the server or something like that. And then either interpreting that or running a machine learning
model against that or something like that. Maybe tell us some of the use cases there.
Yeah. There's a couple of different ways you could use Bokeh for that. So one is that, you know,
if you have a large data set, you know, you're not going to send a billion points into your browser,
right? Your browser will just fall over. So you've got to find some ways to sort of minimize the data.
And that can be done in a variety of ways. And one of the ways is for instance,
it's downsampling. So if you have a large data set and you've got some reasonable way that makes
sense for your use case to downsample it, the Bokeh server can just do that downsampling and then show
you the subset of data that's relevant, right? So that's one way that you can use the Bokeh server
to handle sort of large data sets. Another way is I mentioned this tool data shader, which is
actually specifically designed for being able to, you know, very efficacious visualizations, images of,
you know, hundreds of millions or billions of points, right? It gives you very fine control over the way,
basically the more sophisticated version of alpha compositing happens. So you can actually try to
emphasize the things you want to emphasize in a meaningful way. And so you could use data shader
to data shade those 100 million points. And then that just produces an image and then you can send
the image to Bokeh. And so that's a very fast operation. So the data shader is sort of a form of,
you know, data compression in that sense, but it's still very interactive because, you know,
you can use the events that Bokeh generates to when you, if you resize the plot to get a new image
generated, if you've, for instance, changed the balance of the plot, if you pan or zoom,
you can get a new data shader image based on those new, on those new dimensions. And in fact,
HoloView sort of does that all automatically for you. You can do it by hand with Bokeh and data shader,
or, you know, at a high level, HoloViews can sort of take care of that for you. That's another way in
which, you know, you can sort of reduce the amount of data that you're going to send into the browser.
Coming up next year, I hope we can actually raise though the ceiling of the number of points you can
send. We're going to try to do some work, hopefully, to better improve the WebGL support in Bokeh,
and maybe even just have Bokeh be based entirely on WebGL. In which case, I think we could,
you know, right now, Bokeh, you could send a few hundred thousand points to it,
and it's typically okay. But I think we could raise that sort of ceiling a little bit higher
once we are able to render completely in WebGL.
Yeah, that would be pretty amazing. Is it using like canvases or something now?
Yeah, exactly. So it uses the HTML canvas. There is currently some level of WebGL support.
And the person who maintained that and originally wrote that is just, he's moved on to other things.
And so that WebGL support is sort of, it needs a little work, a little love and care. And we'll
probably just go ahead and try to do things sort of from the beginning and re-found that in a cleaner,
better way going forward. But yeah, there's some WebGL support now, but most of the rendering happens
on HTML canvas.
Okay. So let's talk a little bit about some of the internal implementations of this. Like,
when most people interact with Bokeh, they're probably interacting with some Python API. And as far
as they're concerned, like that's the end of it, right? Like, I call these functions,
the plot comes up magic.
Yeah. And actually the API is actually quite light. So by and large, we've turned the problem
of creating an interactive data visualization web app into the Python problem of creating a bunch of
objects and setting their properties, right? So, you know, I mentioned this JSON representation and
that JSON representation actually mirrors on both sides, a set of objects and those objects being a
graph. So there's a set of objects like a plot, which has, you know, a bunch of renderers and has a
couple of axes and some ranges and some data sources. Maybe that's in a layout that also has some
buttons. So there's objects we call the models that represent all of those items. All of those get
turned into JSON. And then on the JavaScript side, there's a one-to-one correspondence basically of
objects that those get turned into JavaScript objects. The role of the Bokeh server is just to
keep those two sets of objects in sync bi-directional, right? But in terms of what you use from Python,
you create this plot, maybe use the figure function, which sort of puts a lot of these objects
together for you in a convenient, meaningful way. And then you can twiddle their properties. You can
change, you know, the start and end of a range, or you can add the data to the data source, or you can
change various properties of a circle glyph because you want to change how it appears. And so all of
this is, you know, just setting these properties on these Bokeh models. And that is the main, the main
thing that people do, I think. Apart from that, you might be writing callbacks. If you're using the
Bokeh server, you can write callbacks in Python, you know, for if a button gets clicked or a selection
is made, you can run Python code. But you can also create JavaScript callbacks for the standalone
case where, you know, I don't have a Bokeh server, but I still want something to happen when a button
gets clicked or, you know, the selection is made. You can write a little snippet of JavaScript and that
will, you know, do that amount of work. And typically those callbacks, the end result of that is, again,
setting some properties on these objects, right? They might update the data source, which causes the
plot to update, or they might change the range bounds, which causes the plot to zoom out, that sort of
thing. So there is definitely API. There are functions, you know, there are functions for embedding,
there are functions for showing things in notebooks, there are functions for creating plots to start with.
But most of the content of the Bokeh library is these objects, you know, we call models, and they all have
these typed properties that you can set values for. And that's the main interaction mode.
Yeah, so very declarative in that sense, right? You set the aspects or the features that you want,
and it just figures out how to make that interactive.
Yeah, exactly. Yeah.
Nice. So it sounds to me like, listening to you talk, there's a lot going on with JavaScript
here, even though the typical consumer user of it, the developer doesn't have to care or work with it.
What are you using there? Like, what was the history? Was that always just straight JavaScript?
Or what's what are you doing?
Yeah, it's actually never been straight JavaScript. But you're right, the bulk of the work of Bokeh is
actually in this library, Bokeh JS, right, which is JavaScript library.
How big is it?
So minified, I think the main core library is about 600k. It's a pretty hefty library.
That's a pretty hefty library.
It is, right. We're looking to make things, you know, as optimized as we can. We definitely could
use help from, you know, more experienced JavaScript developers. So when Bokeh started, I mean, it was
started by me and a few other folks who are working in none of us, I think, had a lot of front end
experience. I didn't have any JavaScript experience when this project started. And so we actually chose
CoffeeScript at the time. And so that, I think, was maybe a good choice for the time, because it
allowed us to iterate very quickly and sort of make, you know, mistakes more quickly, I guess.
You try out things, you know, it's sort of Python looking like, you know, it's one of these
transpiled languages that turns into JavaScript. But ultimately, once the project grew very large,
it wasn't really suitable for that. And so we actually did a large effort. Most of that work
was done. Heavy lifting was done by one of our core contributors, Mateus, to port Bokeh to TypeScript.
And that's been a huge win for the project. I mean, just in doing the port to TypeScript,
a lot of latent bugs and problems were uncovered. Certainly since it's been done, you know,
I've been prevented from checking in things that would have been an error, you know, by the TypeScript
compiler. So I'm a big fan of that and glad for that. There are certainly new contributors who find it a
little bit more difficult or daunting sometimes to work with TypeScript so that there is a barrier
to entry that's a little bit high for Bokeh. And that's actually just in general, been a problem
for us, I think, to attract sort of contributors on that side, right? Because Bokeh is targeted towards,
you know, Python developers with the promise that they really don't have to worry about JavaScript
if they don't want to. But all the work's actually in JavaScript. And so, you know,
we need JavaScript developers to come help make Bokeh better. And so for the most part,
and so that's been a challenge for us a little bit.
You have this bimodal distribution of skills and desires and stuff like the Python folks and the
JavaScript folks. And yeah, it's interesting.
So we're trying to make Bokeh itself like a, you know, there are people who use the Bokeh
JavaScript library just by itself as a JavaScript library. I would say that from my perspective,
quite a bit of work is needed to do to make that a serious sort of contender for something people
want to use. But we definitely would like to get that done. And we'd love to get help doing that.
I think making Bokeh JS as sort of a first class JavaScript library in its own right would be very,
helpful for our project. And certainly it'd be great to get a community around that as well.
But that's a longer term goal.
This portion of Talk Python To Me is brought to you by Linode. Are you looking for hosting that's
fast, simple, and incredibly affordable? Well, look past that bookstore and check out Linode at
talkpython.fm/Linode. That's L-I-N-O-D-E. Plans start at just $5 a month for a dedicated server
with a gig of RAM. They have 10 data centers across the globe. So no matter where you are or where your
users are, there's a data center for you. Whether you want to run a Python web app, host a private Git
server, or just a file server, you'll get native SSDs on all the machines, a newly upgraded 200
gigabit network, 24-7 friendly support, even on holidays, and a seven-day money-back guarantee.
Need a little help with your infrastructure? They even offer professional services to help you with
architecture, migrations, and more. Do you want a dedicated server for free for the next four months?
Just visit talkpython.fm/Linode.
It's interesting that you found TypeScript to be a nice way of working and whatnot. And I find it'd be
pretty nice as well. Certainly, if I had to choose between CoffeeScript and TypeScript, I would
definitely choose TypeScript. You know, I think TypeScript is interesting in that it's a superset of
JavaScript. So all your regular JavaScript just works, but you can like typify it and make it have other
features and capabilities that that language brings. And that's a pretty interesting way to approach that
problem.
Oh, definitely. Yeah. And to be clear, I think CoffeeScript was the right choice in 2012. I don't,
it's not at all the right choice for anything, I don't think, in 2019. I think at the time,
Bokeh was one of the largest CoffeeScript libraries probably ever developed, which is interesting,
sort of a bit of trivia. But like I said, it let us move fast, especially not having a lot of
experience in front-end dev. But, you know, after time, we just needed something more,
a little more serious, for lack of a better word.
Yeah, sure. I'd just like to get your thoughts real quick. Like, so TypeScript is all about,
you know, sort of static typing and checking and whatnot of your code. And we kind of have that
in Python a little bit now, to the extent that people want to bring it in with mypy and type
annotations. But it's not really the main zen of the language of Python.
What are your thoughts of like working in these two languages, kind of side by side on the same
project?
Well, so this is a really interesting question. So there is actually a history of various projects
that add what's called, I think, manifest typing to Python. And so that goes back to,
there's definitely a project called Traits that Joseph Morrill created that was, you know,
sort of, you could add types to classes, and those would get checked at runtime. And you could also
do things like reactive programming and event-based programming based off changes to those values.
Traits auto-created like QT GUIs, I think, from classes as well, the panels.
And there's another one called Param. And I think there's now one called Struct. But Bokeh
also has its own property system. I mentioned these properties of models. Bokeh has its own
property system, which is rooted in a bunch of fun metaclass programming that lets you add these
declarative types. So the actual models I mentioned for Bokeh objects are typically have no code in them.
They're just classes with these property definitions that say, oh, you know, my plot width is an int,
or my source property is an instance of a column data source, or the range has two floating point
values start and end. And so we're able to provide runtime feedback. If people try to set, you know,
the range.start equals some string value, we say, hey, that's not an appropriate value. It needs to
be an integer. And we also know what properties are on objects. So a feature people have really
complimented it's about is people sort of fat finger a property name, we'll actually give a suggestion
and say the nearest property names are named this. And so we-
Oh, that's nice.
Kind of a type system. Yeah, a really nice feature. It's sort of one of those simple things
you don't think about until you see it. But we've had a type system in Bokeh since the beginning,
right? And so it's a little interesting now that mypy is becoming more popular. We are interested in
looking to use mypy basically after Bokeh 2.0 comes out and we drop Python 2 support. We're
interested in trying to integrate mypy, you know, wherever we can. I think it's a useful tool.
I hadn't used it much until recently, but I have seen it used to good effect. And so I'd like to try to
improve that. I don't know how much we'll be able to use mypy to replace our existing
sort of type property system because that would be a huge endeavor because our properties,
they aren't just the type checking. They also plug into our documentation system so we can auto
generate our reference documentation. Wow.
And of course, all the auto synchronization is based on this too, right? A lot of the machinery for the
automatic synchronization and serialization is based off these property definitions, right?
Right. Like to notify that something has changed to people who are interested and things like that.
Yeah. So replacing it with mypy is not something I'm sure we can do for the properties,
but there's plenty of other places in the library where mypy would be a great benefit
to help us sort of tighten things up. And so we're looking at that after Bokeh 2.0.
Okay. Yeah. Yeah. Very cool. Maybe we could do a quick tour of some of the interesting graphs
or visualizations that you find, you know, like kind of interesting and worth talking about,
like over at demo.bokeh.org or just bokeh.org and just click on the gallery and demos and stuff.
There's a bunch of cool ones that has the source code. There's some interactive bits and so on.
You want to tell us about something you think are worth checking out?
Yeah. So for sure. So first off, if you go to demo.bokeh.org, these are all specifically
Bokeh server applications. So these are all backed by running Python process. And when you click a
button or make a selection, that triggers real Python code. If you go to the gallery on the docs,
most of those are standalone. And so they don't, they aren't backed by a Bokeh server just to get
that distinction out of the way. But at demo.bokeh.org, there's a couple of interesting ones here.
The first one on the upper left is this movie data explorer. And this is actually a fairly direct
comparison, intentional on our part, to a tool called the Shiny Movie Explorer. So people have
asked for a long time, where, you know, where is Shiny for Python? So Shiny is this tool for creating
sort of interactive data visualization applications from the R language. People ask, where is Shiny for
Python? So we're trying to answer that question. And I think Bokeh is a pretty good, decent answer to
the question of where is Shiny for Python. But so we made that as a pretty direct comparison. So that's
one that's interesting. Right next to it, there's this selection histogram, which I think is pretty
cool. So it's got a couple of distributions of scatter points on a plot. And if you make a
selection, it shows the histograms on both axes. And if you make a selection across those points of,
you know, a subset of those points, it then highlights and shows you the histogram of just
the selected points. And then sort of in the opposite direction, the select the histogram of
the unselected points and sort of a shadow faded out version. Wow. Yeah, that one's really cool.
That's a cute one. We've been working on that one for quite a while. It's gone through several
iterations that actually helped us uncover some problems with the Bokeh server early on. It was just sort
of behaving in a weird way and stuttering and realized that events were sort of boomeranging,
sort of making a boomerang effect. And so we had to sort of fix that out. But that was a great example
to help us figure out some of those problems. And we have a lot more things under a lot more rigorous
tests now. So that's good. But yeah, I like that example a lot. Another one we have is this
reproduction of the gap, the gap minder demo. So, you know, Hans Rosling did this, you know,
famous TED talk where he showed all this data. And so we've reproduced that in Bokeh. We've also
embedded the YouTube video. We wanted to be able to show being able to use, you know,
a template to embed Bokeh content in a template with other content. So this also has this YouTube
video embedded.
Yeah, that talk by Hans Rosling, you have the video there. It's really worth watching. Like
that guy really makes statistics and just data like relevant for humanity in a great way.
Absolutely. No, I'd recommend anyone to go watch the video, regardless of where they look at the
Bokeh bar. It's a great video. And I think it's a really compelling one. Tells a great story. So
I'd recommend anyone to go check that out. For sure. Let's see, lower left, there's actually a
financial chart. So here you can have time series from two sort of financial, you know,
data sets and you can do sort of a cross correlation between them. And you can see the
pandas sort of statistical summary there. And you can, you know, use the dropdown to choose
different time series and then the table updates and the data, you know, the plots update. So that's
a nice one as well. And then on the bottom right, there's kind of interesting one that's got this 3D
plot. And this is maybe confusing for some people. Bokeh itself is not a 3D plotting library and has
no inherent 3D capability built in. But Bokeh is very extensible. At some point, we realized that,
you know, lots of users have use cases that are eminently reasonable and, you know, really cool
that we're just not ever going to have the capability or resources to sort of do in the library. I mean,
you have to sort of limit the scope of the core library at some point. Yeah. So we work to make
Bokeh extensible. And so you can create these custom extensions that behave just like built-in
Bokeh models. And they plug in just like, you know, the plot object or a widget object, right,
into Bokeh content. And so this is an example of that. And so this is a custom extension that wraps
a little 3D JS library. And you use the standard Bokeh data sources and you update them. And then
this little 3D plot updates because basically the custom extension just wires together the Bokeh data
source with whatever this other library expects. And so it's really neat example of that. And there's
other examples of extensions in the docs as well for different kinds of use cases. If you want to like,
if you have some really cool JavaScript widget, you want to connect to Bokeh content. If you actually,
if you have a cool JavaScript widget that you want to connect to, you know, all these PyData tools,
like you want to connect this JavaScript widget to, you know, scikit-learn or to Dask or to Numbo or,
you know, pandas, Bokeh is a great bridge for that, right? You can just write a custom extension that wraps
the JavaScript component and then it's automatically Bokeh server can connect it to all those tools.
Yeah. And get all the change notification and interactivity and everything. Yeah.
That's super cool. Okay. Let's see. What else do you want to talk about? You all have Bokeh 2.0 on the
roadmap. What's going on with that? Yeah, absolutely. I would say we were targeting August,
but I think maybe a little more realistic at this point is September. We're always a little optimistic
in our estimates for our schedule. Welcome to software development, right? That's how it goes.
We're all like that way. I don't even want to speculate the first time we promised Bokeh 1.0 and
sort of stability. That was probably a couple of years too early, but we're a little more on track
for Bokeh 2.0. But the main thing about Bokeh 2.0 is just that we are dropping Python 2 support and
also Python 3.4 support. So Python 3.5 will be the minimum version. As long as we are doing a major
version bump, we're also going to take the time to clean up a few other minor things. So there's a few
minor changes that are coming. Hopefully nothing that's too disruptive for anyone. We're going to
be sure to outline and document all those in a migration guide. But that's the main thing is the
Python 2 support. And it gives us a chance to do some things like move to native coroutines. So we use
tornado as the base for the Bokeh server. But if we move to Python 3.5 as a base, we can use native async and
await coroutines everywhere. I'm still with tornado, but it helps us clean up the code a lot. And just
in general, it'll help us clean up the code base and make it a lot more maintainable and sort of
shrink it. And it's always good to delete and shrink code for sure.
Yeah. If you maintain it by deleting it, like you're good. Yeah, that's a good way to do it.
Do you think that'll help attract more maintainers to say like, hey, you could work on this cool async
IO, async and await library rather than, you know, this thing called tornado and these
coroutines?
Well, so it's still going to use tornado. And tornado is a really great tool, but I think it may.
It broadens the thing a little bit to hopefully some more developers. And there are, I stress that
there's a lot of work in Bokeh TS, but there's plenty of work on the Python side to do as well. And we'd
love to have contributors. And honestly, there's actually a lot of work that's not coding. I'd love
to get other contributors involved in all kinds of ways. And if I can speak a minute about that, I mean,
yeah, go for it.
Obviously, people talk about, hey, we need testing help and docs and design help and that's,
or docs help. And that's certainly true for us as well. But other maybe ways people don't think
about it is, you know, we'd love to get like designers, front end designers to come help
make our assets better, to come, you know, help us improve the visual appearance of Bokeh. Cause
you know, we've done okay, but we're not designers. And so it'd be great to get that kind of help.
We actually have a lot of infrastructure now on places like DigitalOcean and AWS, and it would be
great to get experienced people that know those, those systems and those DevOps on those systems to
come help us optimize them for cost, optimize them for usage, you know, whatever.
Yeah. You guys are doing cool stuff with Docker, right?
Yeah, we do a couple of things with Docker. So we run the demo sites, actually a Docker image that's
run on Elastic Beanstalk. And I actually just recently changed some of the instances that that
was running on to hopefully make them a little bit more cost effective for us. But we also just
recently had a spike in S3 usage on one of our buckets that I couldn't really explain just yet.
And so I'd love to get experienced people that can, you know, help with those sorts of things.
Outreach is another area. We're really trying to ramp up our outreach, both to the community in terms of,
you know, fundraising, but also talking to companies. And we've had a couple of people help with that.
And actually just offering support, right? We just moved our mailing list to a discourse instance,
discourse.bokeh.org, which is infinitely better. I mean, the discourse is great for users because
there's a lot of features for code highlighting, for math texts, just, you know, all kinds of things
we could imagine maybe putting an extension to put in actual bokeh content into these discourse posts.
But it's also great for us as maintainers because discourse has a lot of information about what are
people searching for, you know, what topics are popular, that sort of thing. So that helps us know maybe
where attention needs to go. But just answering questions there, people want to go offer support
and help other people use bokeh. That is also a huge deal. I think bokeh has been successful because
we've had a few people that have been able to put a lot of time into helping, you know, the community.
But as the community grows, that's got to scale. It needs to have more and more people helping each
other. And so that kind of thing would also be a great way to contribute to the project. And so
there's all kinds of ways people can plug in. And we'd love to, you know, engage with anyone,
really, about any of those tasks.
Right, right. If you're a designer and you want to make the website look shiny,
that'd be great. If you want to make the graphs look better, or maybe you're a visualization
expert and you've got a different kind of graph you want to bring, whatever, right?
Yeah, absolutely. Or just even making new examples for the docs, you know, making really cool uses of
bokeh to show off, to tweet about, to put in our docs and our gallery. I mean, there's all kinds of
ways to make very valuable contributions to the project just because there's a lot of things to do. And
you know, presently not enough people do them, probably never enough people do them,
right. But obviously, the more help we can get, the better.
Sure. So if I could summarize, you're willing to accept contributors to the project.
Yeah, absolutely. If I hadn't made that clear, yes.
That's awesome. Yeah, it's a cool project. It would be fun to work on.
Yeah.
As part of this bokeh 2.0 thing and the dropping of Python 2, which I like to refer to as legacy Python,
and Python 3 just as straight Python. But as part of dropping legacy Python, one of the things you did,
this is kind of a trend in the data science space, not, I haven't seen it as broadly adopted,
and I'm not really sure why, you signed the Python 3 statement. You want to tell folks about that?
Yeah. So the Python 3 statement is just, you know, it's a GitHub repository where projects can go and
sort of make a PR to list themselves on this website. And it says, we're going to, we pledge to drop
Python 2 support, you know, by sort of this date or this timeframe, and support Python 3 going forward.
And so there are a lot of projects that have signed that. And it's interesting, I thought going in that
bokeh was going to be maybe kind of a leader in this, I wanted to be fairly aggressive. But
all of a sudden, this year, a ton of projects have started releasing, you know, new releases that sort
of are cut off from from that. And so like things like I think Matt Potlib, and yeah, and I think,
you know, Dask, maybe and I forget what else, but there's all these sort of big projects that are
just suddenly, you know, we're never behind the curve, right? They've already dropped Python 2 support,
and we're sort of lagging behind. But I think it's time. I mean, bokeh is definitely used a lot in,
you know, analytics space. And I think things do move a little bit faster there.
Part of that is because of Conda and Anaconda and Conda Forge, they sort of push things forward.
I think also data scientists, you know, do a lot of exploratory work, and they're willing to sort of
move a little bit, you know, in that exploratory work, they're willing to sort of move and put up
a little bit more change to get new features and to, to get that level of performance better.
Once things get deployed, that's when things get a bit more sticky. And that's where you see a lot of
people still using Python 2 and, you know, finance and, you know, other venues like that.
Yeah, absolutely. I feel like these the data science exploration stuff and the models,
like the underlying technology is changing so quick there, right? Like TensorFlow has come out and
pandas and all these things are just changing so quickly that if you're going to come back to it,
you may want to just move to something new or shiny or better anyway. And you just it's much easier to
stay on Python on the later version of Python, whereas like, that website that that guy that used to
work here ran that now we just have to keep running like nobody wants to touch that, right?
As soon as you touch it, it's your problem to fix it if it ever has a problem. And nobody wants that
puppy, right? Yeah, yeah. So some of the companies that are projects that sign the Python 3 statement,
just Python 3 statement, the number three statement.org, TensorFlow, requests, XGBoost,
NumPy, IPython, like that kind of stuff, right? Cython, Spider. There's a ton of projects here.
Yeah, it's great.
A lot of those projects already have. I thought we'd be sort of leading the pack, but we're actually
behind the curve. And that's what made it very easy for us to say, okay, you know,
Q4, it's going to be really easy for us to drop Python 2 because all these other projects will
have already dropped Python 2.
Right, right. For example, Tornado is in there and you guys are built on that. So in a sense,
they're kind of calling your, not calling your bluff, but making sure you're going to have to
follow along anyway if you want to stay in the latest of that, right?
Yeah, even NumPy, right? I mean, you know, obviously,
we could pin to a lower version of NumPy, but we don't want to do that.
Yeah, of course, you wouldn't want to do that. Interesting. So we're just about out of time,
but you want to talk about Portland real quick? Sure. Yeah. Yeah. So we were both in Portland,
right? You recently, somewhat recently, not super recently, but you're somewhat new here and you're
trying to get some stuff going in the data science space in Portland as well, right?
Yeah, absolutely. Yeah. So I've been here about a year and a half and it's been a really great
experience being here in Portland. I really love it. But I am trying to get a PyData meetup here
started. In fact, we have a first meetup scheduled for, I think, August 14th. And we're going to
alternate sort of between an east side and a west side, you know, downtown location, hopefully,
every other month. But me and a colleague of mine are getting that off the ground. And I'm really
excited about it. So PyData is this series of meetups slash conferences, if the meetups get big
enough, that is sort of sponsored by NumFocus. And, you know, I've been involved with NumFocus since the
beginning. I think it's a terrific, amazing organization. The people that are there are really
great. And I think the PyData meetups in particular have been really, really great, you know,
both meetups and also the PyData conferences are also really good as well. So really excited to get that
started in Portland. I was almost kind of surprised that it wasn't here already. There's a, you know,
there's a PyData Seattle meetup and there's PyData meetup. There's like 105 PyData meetups,
I think, around the world. So it was by far time that Portland gets one. So I'm really excited to
be helping get that off the ground. Yeah, that's awesome. I mean, that only really is interesting
to like 5% of the listeners, maybe. But it's still really cool that you're doing that here in
Portland. And, you know, other folks, they can create a PyData, their city's airport acronym if
they want, right? Absolutely. I think most places don't use the airport acronym,
but I'm really fond of PDX. So I invited a PDX on a good.
Yeah, it's definitely a good one. All right. Well, you know, Bokeh is a really cool project,
and I'm glad you all have been working on it. And it's great to see all this progress and excitement
around it. It's a great, great one. So people should definitely check it out.
Yeah, yeah. Well, thank you very much for having me. I love to have the opportunity to sort of spread
the word and talk about Bokeh. And it's been really great.
Yeah, absolutely. Let me ask you the final two questions before you get out of here, though.
If you're going to write some code, probably Python code, but maybe JavaScript as well,
I guess. What editor do you use?
I have been won over by VS Code.
Okay.
Yeah, I still use VI binding. So I grew up using VI and that's still in my fingers. And so I love
VI bindings. But I used to use Sublime Text, but I moved to VS Code and haven't looked back.
Yeah, that seems a pretty straightforward choice to go from Sublime to VS Code.
Those are, you know, one has so much more energy and they're super similar in their sort of workflow.
And then notable PyPI package, I'll go ahead and throw out there Bokeh for you. And what else? If
there's something like, hey, I ran across this and people might not know about it, but it's really
amazing. What would you say?
Yeah, let's see. Well, I'll say PyPI or Konda, right? So don't forget Konda. Very important
to remember. But, you know, it's hard to say. I'm so focused on, you know, using and working on Bokeh.
That's like my day to day. Honestly, I have a little bit of tunnel vision, maybe to put it one
way. But, you know, I think a lot of the tools that are built on top of Bokeh are really interesting to
me. And so I like, you know, looking at what is happening with them and seeing what developments
are going. Obviously, I think all the tools in the PyData ecosystem are amazing. I think Numba in
particular is really interesting. So Numba is a compiler for Python, lets you really accelerate,
you know, certain kinds of code. And it was originally created again by Travis, you know,
Oliphant, but it's been moved on since then. And it's actually grown really successful in certain
kinds of venues. So I think Numba is a pretty interesting use case. And I certainly, of course,
think Dask is really fantastic as well. Yeah, those are definitely good ones. All right,
Brian, final call to action. People want to get started with Bokeh. What do they do?
Yeah, absolutely. Love to get people involved. So if you want to, you know, talk about development or
have questions about support, we have this discourse, discourse.bokeh.org. If you want to just
get started from a very high level, just bokeh.org is a great one stop to get to a lot of other
resources like documentation, like the gallery, like the GitHub page, and just to see what,
going on. But in terms of like talking to us, yeah, the discourse is a great spot to make a
poster topic there. And of course, GitHub is a great place if you have ideas for suggestions,
you know, or want to report problems, of course, you know, GitHub is a great place to contact us.
Yeah, for sure. And PRs are accepted.
PRs are always accepted. Yes.
Yeah, very cool. At least considered.
Consider.
At least considered for sure.
Cool. All right. Well, thanks so much for being on the show. It's good to talk with you.
Absolutely. Thank you so much, Michael.
Yeah, bye.
Bye.
This has been another episode of Talk Python to Me. Our guest on this episode was Brian Vandevin,
and it's been brought to you by Ting and Linode. Ting is the fast mobile network custom built for
technical folks. Use their savings calculator to see exactly what you'd pay. Visit python.ting.com
to get a $25 credit and get started without a contract. Linode is your go-to hosting for whatever
you're building with Python. Get four months free at talkpython.fm/linode. That's L-I-N-O-D-E.
Want to level up your Python? If you're just getting started, try my Python Jumpstart by Building 10 Apps
course. Or if you're looking for something more advanced, check out our new async course that digs
into all the different types of async programming you can do in Python. And of course, if you're interested
in more than one of these, be sure to check out our everything bundle. It's like a subscription
that never expires. Be sure to subscribe to the show. Open your favorite podcatcher and search for
Python. We should be right at the top. You can also find the iTunes feed at /itunes, the Google
Play feed at /play, and the direct RSS feed at /rss on talkpython.fm. This is your host,
Michael Kennedy. Thanks so much for listening. I really appreciate it. Now get out there and write
some Python code.
We'll see you next time.